Add FVM Randomness FIP (#817)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-randomness.md

---
fip: "<to be assigned>" <!--keep the qoutes around the fip number, i.e: `fip: "0001"`-->
title: Improvements to the FVM randomness syscalls

> author: Aayush Rajasekaran (@arajasek), Steven Allen (@stebalien)

Reviewer: Nit: please quote the author line to avoid YAML warnings

discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/790, https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/791
status: Draft
type: Technical (Core)

> category (*only required for Standard Track): <Core>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
category: Core
```

created: <2023-28-28>
---

<!--You can leave these HTML comments in your merged FIP and delete the visible duplicate text guides, they will not appear and may be helpful to refer to if you edit it again. This is the suggested template for new FIPs. Note that a FIP number will be assigned by an editor. When opening a pull request to submit your FIP, please use an abbreviated title in the filename, `fip-draft_title_abbrev.md`. The title should be 44 characters or less.-->

## Simple Summary
<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the FIP.-->

- Actors/Contracts: Don't expect clients to "hash" randomness for you, do it yourself

> - FVM: Don't impose any lookback limit on randomness and tipset CID fetching, but charge proportional to the lookback amount

Reviewer: Could you please phrase this as a declarative statement of what's changing, rather than imperative? It's hard to avoid some duplication with the abstract, but I usually to orient this summary toward the solution, while the abstract expands a bit more on the problem/goal (in this case, simplicity?).

"Changes VM-provided randomness to .... Removes limits on chain lookback but charges gas ...."

1. formalizing that no lookback limit is enforced on randomness and tipset CID fetching, and modifying the gas pricing to be based on a skiplist of length 20

## Change Motivation
<!--The motivation is critical for FIPs that want to change the Filecoin protocol. It should clearly explain why the existing protocol specification is inadequate to address the problem that the FIP solves. FIP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected outright.-->

The fact that fetching randomness and tipset CID today isn't priced proportional to the lookback is a security risk. This isn't a major issue today since only trusted code (the builtin actors) can request unbounded lookbacks. However, we still want to fix this in order to more accurately charge for costs, and future-proof this operation against both changes to the builtin actors and user-deployed "native" actors.

The motivation to push the hashing operation into user-space is that the FVM already has a syscall that supports hashing. As a result, the FVM doesn't need to be performing this hashing for the client, and we can allow users (actors) to "draw" their randomness as they please.

> ## Specification

Reviewer: I think this specification is missing a description of changes required to the built-in actors to do their own hashing.

Author: You're right!

<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Filecoin implementations. -->

### Interfaces

We propose the following changes to the FVM syscalls:
- change the `get_chain_randomness` syscall from `get_chain_randomness(dst: i64, round: ChainEpoch, entropy: &[u8],)` to `get_chain_randomness(round: ChainEpoch)`
- change the `get_beacon_randomness` syscall from `get_beacon_randomness(dst: i64, round: ChainEpoch, entropy: &[u8],)` to `get_beacon_randomness(round: ChainEpoch)`

The same breaking change should also be made to the `Externs` interface, and all client implementations of this interface. 

### Client changes

Clients no longer receive the `dst` and `entropy` parameters for the randomness Extern methods, and should skip the final step of "drawing" randomness in which this DST and entropy is mixed into the hash.

> We also seek consensus amongst Core Devs that Filecoin clients are expected to be able to support chain walkbacks all the way to genesis, with a performance no _worse_ than that based on a skiplist of length 20. Clients are free to be more performant (eg. constant-time).

Reviewer: My understanding of a true skiplist would be logarithmic lookup time. It's not clear that's what you mean here though – I get the impression of a linear scan moving in steps of 20 (and then <20 steps of 1 to finish. Could you clarify this?

Clients can also be less performant, but the gas pricing would not be accurate for such clients.

### Gas Pricing

> We change the gas pricing for both `get_randomness` operations, as well as the `get_tipset_cid` operation, to be proportional to the lookback distance. Specifically, we:

Reviewer 2: I'd just specify the values here and move the _how_ down to the design rational. I.e.,

1. The spec cares about the actual gas fees and what they imply for the client.
2. The reviewers care about _how_ we arrived at those gas fees. But that's basically: we picked them based on lotus and all existing clients use the same logic.

- confirm their support for chain walkbacks is as good as requested by this FIP, or explicitly decide that they are okay being less performant than the system is priced for

## Test Cases
<!--Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for FIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other FIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.-->

TODO

## Security Considerations
<!--All FIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. FIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. A FIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.-->

> This FIP is an overall improvement to security, as it is hardens some aspects of the system. This is especially important if we plan to eventually support native WASM actors.

Reviewer: I know it's a bit duplicative, but could you describe what aspects are hardened?

---
fip: "<to be assigned>" <!--keep the qoutes around the fip number, i.e: `fip: "0001"`-->
title: Improvements to the FVM randomness syscalls
author: "Aayush Rajasekaran (@arajasek), Steven Allen (@stebalien)"
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/790, https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/791
status: Draft
type: Technical (Core)
category: Core
created: <2023-28-28>
---

<!--You can leave these HTML comments in your merged FIP and delete the visible duplicate text guides, they will not appear and may be helpful to refer to if you edit it again. This is the suggested template for new FIPs. Note that a FIP number will be assigned by an editor. When opening a pull request to submit your FIP, please use an abbreviated title in the filename, `fip-draft_title_abbrev.md`. The title should be 44 characters or less.-->

## Simple Summary
<!--"If you can't explain it simply, you don't understand it well enough." Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the FIP.-->

> Changes the FVM syscalls that fetch randomness to no longer hash in personalization. Contracts must now do so themselves.
> Changes the gas costs of the FVM syscalls that fetch randomness and tipset CIDs to be linearly proportional to how far back the lookback epoch is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This FIP:

1. Changes the FVM syscalls that fetch randomness to no longer mix-in user provided "entropy", actors must now do so themselves.
2. Changes the gas costs of the FVM syscalls that fetch randomness and tipset CIDs to be proportional to the lookback distance.
```

Basically:

- Trim jargon (wtf is personalization?). Really, we shouldn't use "entropy" but I can't think of a better term.
- Readability.

(feel free to drop this suggestion and do it your way, I just think the simple summary needs a bit of work)

## Specification
<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Filecoin implementations. -->

### Interfaces

We propose the following changes to the FVM syscalls:
- change the `get_chain_randomness` syscall from `get_chain_randomness(dst: i64, round: ChainEpoch, entropy: &[u8],)` to `get_chain_randomness(round: ChainEpoch)`
- change the `get_beacon_randomness` syscall from `get_beacon_randomness(dst: i64, round: ChainEpoch, entropy: &[u8],)` to `get_beacon_randomness(round: ChainEpoch)`

The same breaking change should also be made to the `Externs` interface, and all client implementations of this interface. 

### Actor changes

The implementation of the `Runtime` interface for the FVM has to change to:
- no longer supply the `dst` and `entropy` params when calling into the FVM SDK

> - hash the randomness returned by the FVM with the `dst` and `entropy` params

Reviewer 2: Let's reproduce the function here.

### Client changes

Clients no longer receive the `dst` and `entropy` parameters for the randomness Extern methods, and should skip the final step of "drawing" randomness in which this DST and entropy is mixed into the hash.

We also seek consensus amongst Core Devs that Filecoin clients are expected to be able to support chain walkbacks all the way to genesis, with a performance no _worse_ than that based on a skiplist of length 20. Clients are free to be more performant (eg. constant-time).
Clients can also be less performant, but the gas pricing would not be accurate for such clients.

### Gas Pricing

We change the gas pricing for both `get_randomness` operations, as well as the `get_tipset_cid` operation, to be proportional to the lookback distance. Specifically, we set it to:

> `75 * lookback + 110200 + 15000 + 21000`, where `lookback` is equal to the difference between the current epoch, and the requested epoch.

Reviewer 2: I would still simplify this to two parameters:

1. The per-tipset cost.
2. The offset.

## Specification
<!--The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Filecoin implementations. -->

### Interfaces

We propose the following changes to the FVM syscalls:
- change the `get_chain_randomness` syscall from `get_chain_randomness(dst: i64, round: ChainEpoch, entropy: &[u8],)` to `get_chain_randomness(round: ChainEpoch)`
- change the `get_beacon_randomness` syscall from `get_beacon_randomness(dst: i64, round: ChainEpoch, entropy: &[u8],)` to `get_beacon_randomness(round: ChainEpoch)`

The same breaking change should also be made to the `Externs` interface, and all client implementations of this interface. 

### Actor changes

The implementation of the `Runtime` interface for the FVM has to change to:
- no longer supply the `dst` and `entropy` params when calling into the FVM SDK
- "draw" randomness for the calling actor, by hashing the randomness returned by the FVM with the `dst`, `round`, and `entropy` params

The randomness drawing operation looks like this:

```
pub fn draw_randomness(

>     rbase: &[u8; RANDOMNESS_LENGTH],

Reviewer 2: hard code or define the length.

>     pers: DomainSeparationTag,

Reviewer 2: i64

Reviewer 2: I.e., make this code stand by itself.

>     round: ChainEpoch,

Reviewer 2: i64

    data.extend_from_slice(entropy);

    // Ask the FVM to now hash this data
    fvm::crypto::hash_blake2b(&data)
}
```

### Client changes

Clients no longer receive the `dst` and `entropy` parameters for the randomness Extern methods, and should skip the final step of "drawing" randomness in which this DST and entropy is mixed into the hash.

We also seek consensus amongst Core Devs that Filecoin clients are expected to be able to support chain walkbacks all the way to genesis, with a performance no _worse_ than that based on a skiplist of length 20. Clients are free to be more performant (eg. constant-time).
Clients can also be less performant, but the gas pricing would not be accurate for such clients.

### Gas Pricing

We change the gas pricing for both `get_randomness` operations, as well as the `get_tipset_cid` operation, to be proportional to the lookback distance.

We charge `75 * lookback + 5800 * 19` for the lookback cost, where `lookback` is equal to the difference between the current epoch, and the requested epoch.
We additionally charge `15000` for the offset (the cost of producing the randomness/tipset CID itself), and `21000` for the extern cost.

> The total gas formula is thus: `75 * lookback + 110200 + 15000 + 21000`.

Reviewer 2: Please include the final number. I'd prefer to just drop all math from the spec and move it to the rational, but we can keep it if you feel strongly about it. However, we _should_ include the final number regardless.
